the main functionality of browser is to interact/navigate through different websites, convert the HTML code to webpage in a way that it is easy to interect for a user. To do this, a web browser has different components. When a user enters a URL, basically he/she is giving address of that HTML/XML document which is stored somewhere in the server. Server is requested to provide that document and browser fetches it, borwser uses following components to do that in various ways:
1)User Interface: To interact with the web browser & its functionalities like search bar, refresh button, menu, bookmarks etc. we have UI of the browser. User can put the URL in the search bar or can navigate through different UrL using click/forward/backward etc buttons of the UI. UI also interact with the painting/layouting created by UI backend
2)Browser engine: It connects the UI of the browser with the rendering engine. It monitors the rendering engine continuously while iterpreting the inputs coming from multiple user interfaces. Once URL is provided, browser connects to the server and downloads the HTML/XML document, and is rendered through render engine. While this is being done, browser engine continuously provides bridge between user input and their implecations on the rendered code.
3)Rendering Engine: The HLML/CSS code is parsed and converted into DOM, it executes them and shows the translation on the screen. It co-ordinates with browser ingine for getting the i/p from the user in real time. As respose of URL request, when a document is downloaded from the server, generally network layer sends the document in chunks, these parts of the received documents are parsed and converted to DOM tree. While the DOM tree is being constructed, the browser constructs another tree, the render tree. This tree is consist of visual elements in the order in which they will be displayed. It is the visual representation of the document. The purpose of this tree is to enable painting the contents in their correct order. All the elements of the document are positioned in this rendered tree. After that the document is painted to be seen on the screen fo this renderer uses paint() method which in turn uses UI backend layer
4)Networking:Component of the browser which retrieves the URLs using the common internet protocols of HTTP or FTP. The networking component handles all aspects of Internet communication and security. Whenever a URL is entered, networking layer takes care wheather the URL is addressing to secured location, protect the host machine if malicious response is received also makes sure the data remains secured/unaltered while fetching it from the server. The networking layer also start sending the contents of the requested documents to the rendering engine in chunks of 8KBs.
5)JavaScript Interpreter: It is the component of the browser which interprets and executes the javascript code embedded in a website. The interpreted results are sent to the rendering engine for display. The fetched document may contain JS code for interactivity of the webpage. JS interpreter takes care of that part. JS code consists of events & functions, the script processor is used to execute these.
6)UI Backend: UI backecnd is used for drawing basic widgets like combo boxes and windows. The output of the renderer is painted using this component.
7)Data Persistence/Storage: Browsers support storage mechanisms such as localStorage, IndexedDB, WebSQL and FileSystem. It is a small database created on the local drive of the computer where the browser is installed. It manages user data such as cache, cookies, bookmarks and preferences. When an URL is rentered then along with the HTML/css doc as its response we also get other files which can be embedded as different URL part of the original document. Sometimes to avoid traffic/late response, browser has provision to store such data in local folder.